RR - use exception mappers on auth failure exceptions for proactive auth (#29590)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-built-in-authentication-support-concept.adoc

=== How to customize authentication exception responses

You can use JAX-RS `ExceptionMapper` to capture Quarkus Security authentication exceptions such as `io.quarkus.security.AuthenticationFailedException`, for example:

[source,java]
----
package io.quarkus.it.keycloak;

import javax.annotation.Priority;
import javax.ws.rs.Priorities;
import javax.ws.rs.core.Response;
import javax.ws.rs.ext.ExceptionMapper;
import javax.ws.rs.ext.Provider;

import io.quarkus.security.AuthenticationFailedException;

@Provider
@Priority(Priorities.AUTHENTICATION)
public class AuthenticationFailedExceptionMapper implements ExceptionMapper<AuthenticationFailedException> {

    @Context
    UriInfo uriInfo;

    @Override
    public Response toResponse(AuthenticationFailedException exception) {
        return Response.status(401).header("WWW-Authenticate", "Basic realm=\"Quarkus\"").build();
    }
}
----

> CAUTION: By default, authentication mechanisms like `io.quarkus.oidc.runtime.OidcAuthenticationMechanism` needs to handle Quarkus Security authentication exceptions themselves in order redirect request and set correct response status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CAUTION: Some HTTP authentication mechanisms such as `io.quarkus.oidc.runtime.OidcAuthenticationMechanism` need to handle authentication exceptions themselves in order to create a correct redirect URL, status code, cookies, etc.
```

Reviewer: Sorry, just realized OIDC handles bearer tokens as well which is just 401, so we need to be specific it is the code flow exceptions which should not be customized

> For that reason, built-in exception mappers that handles authentication failures challenge authentication mechanisms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that reason, using custom exception mappers to customize authentication exceptions thrown by mechanisms such as `OIDC` is not recommended.
```

> See xref:security-customization.adoc#dealing-with-more-than-one-http-auth-mechanisms[Dealing with more than one HttpAuthenticationMechanism] section for more details on authentication mechanism challenge and more specifically {quarkus-blob-url}/extensions/resteasy-reactive/quarkus-resteasy-reactive/runtime/src/main/java/io/quarkus/resteasy/reactive/server/runtime/exceptionmappers/SecurityExceptionMapperUtil.java[SecurityExceptionMapperUtil.java] for an example how RESTEasy Reactive sends a challenge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such cases, a safer way to customize authentication exceptions is to make sure the proactive authentication is not disabled and use Vert.x HTTP route failure handlers, as events come to the handler with the correct response status and headers.
```

Reviewer: I thought the last sentence was too complex, with a link to the source is likely to be too technical kind of info for the docs, so propose just to replace it with a simple advice

Author: I think suggested way is clearer thanks.

> Perhaps safer way with enabled Proactive Authentication is to provide a failure handler, as event comes to the handler with correct response status and headers,

Reviewer: It can be now removed if the above suggestion is merged

> therefore only thing that needs to be done is to customize response like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
therefore the only thing that needs to be done is to customize the response like this:
```
